---
title: "Tantalum in hydrothermal fluids"
collection: publications
status: published
category: manuscripts
excerpt: ""
link: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0016703724005441'
permalink: /publication/2024-07-01-GCASI_Ta
venue: 'Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta special issue “Hydrothermal Geochemistry and Beyond: A Tribute to Terry M. Seward”'
authors: "<strong>Bin Hu</strong>, Barbara Estchmann, Denis Testemale, Weihua Liu, Qiushi Guan, Harald Müller, Joël Brugger."
date: 2024-07-01
---

Understanding the behaviour of tantalum (Ta) in hydrothermal systems is pivotal for understanding its geochemical enrichment processes and economic extraction via hydrometallurgy. Yet, its behaviour in hydrothermal systems remains poorly characterised. This study investigates the coordination chemistry, speciation, and solubility of pentavalent Ta(V) in fluoride (F)- and chloride (Cl)-rich hydrothermal solutions up to 413 ˚C and 800 bar, utilising in-situ High Energy Resolution Fluorescence Detected X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy (HERFD-XAS). The results reveal the stability of high order fluoridotantalate complexes in fluoride-rich fluids solutions up to the highest investigated temperature, highlighting fluoride’s paramount role in enhancing Ta solubility through the formation of stable complexes in aqueous solutions. A transition from nonafluoridotantalate tetraanion (TaF<sub>9</sub><sup>4-</sup>) to heptafluoridotantalate dianion (TaF<sub>7</sub><sup>2-</sup>) complexes was observed as a function of temperature in solutions containing ≥ 1<i>m</i> fluoride. Conversely, our findings indicate a negligible role for chloride in Ta complexation even in high Cl (~6<i>m</i>) aqueous solutions, suggesting that Ta chloride complexes do not contribute significantly to Ta transport in hydrothermal systems. Existing solubility data were reinterpreted based on an updated speciation model that integrates the in-situ XAS results. This confirms that Ta(OH)<sub>5</sub>(aq) predominates in solutions containing <0.02<i>m</i> fluoride; oxyfluoridotantalate anions such as [TaF<sub>3</sub>(OH)<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup>] dominate in solutions containing intermediate fluoride concentrations (0.02 to 1<i>m</i>), and the fluoridotantalate anions [TaF<sub>9</sub><sup>4-</sup> to TaF<sub>7</sub><sup>2-</sup>] occur in more concentrated fluoride solutions (>1<i>m</i>) at hydrothermal conditions (~100-400 ˚C). Derived thermodynamic data for these species enable better understanding and geochemical modelling of Ta transport in hydrothermal fluids, highlighting the potential of F-rich fluids to transport significant amounts of Ta.
